---
title: Empathy
date: 2015-02-24 03:53 UTC
tags:
---


Recently, I attended a talk at 8th Light in Chicago given by Doug Bradbury on “Developing Empathy, or, How to Not Be a Jerk All the Time”. 

I’m always looking to learn new things, but to be honest before I even heard a word spoken at the talk I thought that I was an expert in empathy and couldn’t possibly learn anything new. I wouldn’t say that i’m a cocky person - but I felt that I was a pretty good listener and my rocky road of life and experiences could help me have empathy for pretty much anyone.

I quickly learned that I really had no idea what empathy truly meant. By definition:

>*“Empathy is the ability to sense other people’s emotions, coupled with the ability to imagine what someone else might be thinking or feeling.”*

But what does it really mean?

####You can have empathy for anyone

>*“You do not have to have anything in common with someone to have 
empathy.”*      

This quote resonated with me not because I feel that I am unable to have empathy for someone because I have nothing in common with them, but because I immediately try to show the person what I do have in common with them by telling them about my experience.

This can best be described by what Doug referred to as “story-telling” which can be viewed by someone as “one-upping” their situation or re-focusing the conversation on your problems or feelings. 

Personally, I feel that sharing a story with someone for the purpose of showing them that they are not alone is ok. But it is very important to avoid making the situation about you and to focus the conversation on their feelings and their experiences. 

####Don’t be judgemental

>*“Empathy does not involve judging the person and their issue.”*

One of the quickest ways to be a jerk is to judge a person and put yourself on a higher ground. Just because you feel that their problem is small or even their fault does not give you the right to be condescending and judgemental. It’s also important to be aware of your body language because sometimes it can speak louder than words.

####Do more than listen

>*“You have to be more than a good listener.”*

In order to have empathy you have to be willing to truly listen to the other person. But it is so much more than that. It is important to show that you are listening. Repeating back phases that the other person says is a great way to show that you are listening. Another thing to pay attention to is that you’re not ending the conversation prematurely. Of course the conversation cannot go on forever, but sometimes people unknowingly end a conversation by responding with something that does not allow for the conversation to continue. 

Empathy has been a hot topic and rightfully so. Imagine how much better the world would be if people were able to be more empathetic with their family, friends, co-workers, customers or even complete strangers. 